welcome to topcast and this time for a
discussion across time I've been doing a
lot of critiques lately well in fact a
lot of top cars a lot of the content
there is a critique of some kind of
misconception that's out there because I
happen to think that people like David
Deutsch and Carl popper and some others
are actually providing us with genuine
explanations about the world but they
are not well known enough and therefore
we have to not only explain what they're
saying because they've already done that
but also to counter all the
misconceptions that are out there the
things that people already think they
know now for me personally sometimes
this can get a little worrisome because
you're saying the same kind of thing
over and over again the style of writing
with some of these people is
impenetrable it's obtuse it's very
abstract there's no examples to hang
your arguments on that kind of thing and
so I guess just in terms of a cleansing
exercise I wanted to go back to the
master himself back to Karl Popper and
read some of his material just by way of
comparison and just to reassure myself
that there are actually people out there
who do make sense on this stuff I said
recently in an episode of topcast that
it's so fortunate we have David Deutsch
to discuss physics philosophy and much
elsewhere the creator of the theory of
quantum computation is around but Alan
Turing is not the creator of the theory
of good explanations is around though
Carl popper is not anti-rational means
the importance of crucial experimental
testing static versus Dynamic societies
knowledge as useful information and
knowledge with reach and knowledge is
biological or explanatory and AGI as
people though Charles Darwin we imagine
might have been truly astonished at all
of that we can't ask him about it but we
can chat to David books of course are a
kind of asynchronous conversation across
time and space except well it's one way
and then today I want to try that anyway
with Carl popper and what he wrote as I
say I've been complaining recently that
philosophy in general is rather too
often abstract and impractical Ludwig
Wittgenstein is a wonderful case in
point not only does his philosophy
swallow itself in an abstract
Singularity of sorts it says that all
philosophy including itself is pointless
and once you understand this fact of
reality you can do away with the whole
thing but besides that wittgenstein's
work has a complete poverty of examples
instances of where this stuff is
practically useful but of course he has
to say that he has to leave all that out
he has to leave out actual philosophical
problems instances where the philosophy
is needed because it's kanta to a
central thesis his Central thesis being
the whole project is pointless anyway
wittgenstein's first work the tractatus
logico philosophicus usually just called
the tractatus is a barely legible list
of statements set out like some sort of
formal proof it's intended to be a proof
of a Kind leading to the final statement
in the work that quote whereof one
cannot speak thereof one must be silent
end quote so he basically concluded that
the purported subject matter of
philosophy indeed anything outside of
mathematics and science and maybe
history that kind of thing referred to
stuff which were outside the facts of
reality that we get from our senses or
from reason so it was pointless to talk
about those things because words could
not properly label them they may or may
not exist but we can't speak about them
in some technical sense because the
function of languages to talk about the
content of our senses and thoughts so
much for Wittgenstein is the only other
real work of note was philosophical
investigations a book claimed as ranking
number one literally number one by
college and university teachers in the
US as the most important work of the
20th century but again that book it's
all about language he talks about
language games he talks about family
resemblances as the way words get their
meanings he talks about the Duck Rabbit
illusion and beetles in boxes if you can
believe it basically lots of thought
experiments lots of philosophy in the
abstract disconnected from actual
problems in science or mathematics or
anywhere else it's stuff about language
it's not concrete well unless you're a
linguist or something it's very narrow
and it doesn't help anyone much in
Practical terms Wittgenstein is the
Philosopher's philosopher he writes
about what we can't know without really
grappling with what it means to know
something so he tells you all the way in
which we can't know something without
telling you how it is we actually know
he conjures up abstract thought
experiments like well what if everyone's
carrying around a box but they can't
look inside but they refer to what's
inside the box as a beetle well big
mystery to what does the word Beetle
refer that's the kind of things so many
philosophers engage in purely abstract
stuff beetles which might or might not
exist said to be in boxes that cannot be
opened I mean this is the most important
work of the 20th century According to
some this is in a sense why popper is
not the Philosopher's philosopher he is
the anti-philosopher philosopher and I
mean that in the best possible way he's
completely at odds in so many ways with
all other philosophers and their
philosophies because he's talking about
meaty stuff concretes you open up random
pages in his books or his papers and
he's writing about what Darwin or
Einstein did what Newton and Descartes
were considering what their problems
were Dirac Faraday plank Pythagoras
Plato Ptolemy I mean I'm just scratching
the surface here he's like a scientist
of the history of ideas a scientist of
knowledge he is looking at what is done
how it's done and how those guys
explained what they were doing and
perhaps clearing up misconception
questions they had he's going to the
history of ideas and solving problems
it's not out there in The Ether in the
abstract land of how words might or
might not behave so to speak it's not
the science of words it's a science of
ideas okay I'm pushing the limits of the
term science there but you know what I
mean he's actually investigating
explaining theorizing testing refuting
and the clarity the clarity when you
compare what he says and how he writes
to anyone else is just striking yes I
know people read proper especially after
they've read Deutsche and they say oh
it's very dry and it's hard to
understand well yes yes relative to
Deutsche popper is dry and more
difficult to understand he's a product
of his day and he is writing for his
contemporaries and there's a style and
then language changes over time there's
a style and of course some people will
read Deutsche having been used to well
look I don't want to mention names but
let's just say other works in the
non-fiction section and sure they're
often narratives potted histories of
ideas and stuff
and one gets the impression with certain
so-called Popular Science works that
barely deserve the title perhaps that
the author is a frustrated screenwriter
it's almost as if they need a plot and
characters and so on but Deutsche on the
other hand is giving you the ideas rapid
fire at higher density and as everyone
observes you know his works are
completely counter to oh what you
usually know coming into them which is
also like popper the first and foremost
reason for rioting The Works in the case
of popular Deutsche it's not to
entertain but a lot of Popular Science
and a lot of non-fiction stuff out there
today is to do that and popular
informing you in an efficient way now I
just happen to have a preference
personally I do think they're
entertaining because they're thrilling
but yes I guess I've been persuaded that
perhaps some extra background knowledge
is needed at times I was already coming
from a physics philosophy background and
so was impressed because there simply is
nothing like the fabric of reality in
the beginning of infinity elsewhere in
existence perhaps girdle bar gets
closest but even then not really I read
popper as part of my university studies
but it was very limited and was in a
context where I had to read a bunch of
other stuff as well alongside him and he
was sort of treated like this minor
Fringe character Wittgenstein was the
real guy Hume Descartes leibniza
Berkeley Khan the classics in other
words from the 17th and 18th centuries
and of course all the Ancients they were
the real stuff the 20th century was
basically Wittgenstein like I say with
minor appearances by kripkein theraband
and lackatosh and some others so to be
honest it was only once I'd read the
fabric of reality in 1997 or so and then
I read the recommended reading at the
end of that book and first on the list
was something by Richard Dawkins the
selfish genes I read that and then I
really like that so I read his book the
extended phenotype that wasn't on the
list but I also thought that was great
then I skipped to conjectures and
refutations by Papa which I had picked
up in the University Library once or
twice before in order to write some
essay or other which I've long since
forgotten but I remember reading that
book and thinking just how clear it was
relatively speaking by comparison to the
other philosophical works we were
expected to read as part of our
philosophy studies the language was
Modern by philosophical standards and
this guy popper was talking about
actual science which none of the others
ever really did the discovery you talked
about the discovery of Neptune hertz's
discovery of electromagnetic waves
lavazziers experiments with combustion
Kepler Galileo fresnel Faraday Maxwell
they kept appearing they kept cropping
up I mean perhaps not every single page
but there was meat on the bones as I
keep on saying he's talking about how
this or that was conjectured and how
about how the experiment was then done
the specific experiment that ruled out
something or other it wasn't a thought
experiment it was an experiment with
real life rays of light and glass lenses
and Concepts like refraction as a
physics student this was clearly the
stuff it wasn't abstract it was concrete
actual places where philosophy explained
what the scientists did and how science
therefore made progress he didn't care
about definitions and the ultimate
foundations of knowledge he wrote about
those things but just to say all of that
is a pointless distraction and he
explained why we want to know what this
knowledge stuff is and how it grows and
changes the world and he wrote about
optimism and Liberty and how authorities
who claim to know the truth were a
dangerous kind of a thing and not just
in religion in politics and science
everywhere and I mean in comparison to
Wittgenstein and Kant and many of the
classics it's just night and day now
again personally I quite like Descartes
and liebnitz but I like them now in
retrospect in the same way that I kind
of like Lord of the Rings maybe not
quite as much as Lord of the Rings but
the same sort of thing the language that
is used and the journey that you go on
you have to suspend your sense of
disbelief of course and you just go on
the journey all the while knowing it's
not real this is all a myth but of
course myths can teach you something
even in myth truth can be found and
besides I like to know what popper is
talking about who these people are is
referring to so knowing a little bit
about people like Descartes and leibnitz
helps with that because he is referring
to them a lot he is referring to the
so-called classic and the ancient
philosophers so I get that if you don't
know much philosophy already or the
history of ideas then reading popper has
that drawback somewhat he keeps
referring to these other usually much
older philosophers which I suppose kind
of makes him a little bit like talking
with Lord of the Rings or Georgiana
Martin with Game of Thrones if you're
not on top of things early on as you're
reading these books then the rate at
which you're encountering new characters
can be off-putting you just get lost in
the new names and places so what I'm
doing today here is reading from one of
Popper's Works having a bit of a
refresher after all of the critiquing
I've been doing not to say I'm not going
to be critiquing today I will be but
just not in the same style because hey
there's not much to critique there's
just a lot to celebrate this particular
work is called on the sources of
knowledge and ignorance it's about how
the two main approaches to where
knowledge comes from you know does it
come from an empirical means via our
senses or does it come from Pure reason
or some combination of both and if it
does how what do the other philosophers
say all of that stuff this is really
about the history of ideas about how we
know what we know and what ways people
have traditionally said how it is we
know what we know now I'm doing this
because I was reading this piece again
and just so many passages not only stand
the test of time in terms of substance
but style the content here is relevant
even today and the style the clarity
well that's one thing but for me some of
these passages are powerful because of
the sharpness and poignancy of what he
says now as I say I'm not just going to
fawn over him there are some places
where I kind of disagree where I'd love
to speak to him about why he wasn't
going all in so to speak where he might
have been conceding to his
contemporaries or the possible
objections that we're going to crop up
in his mind so this won't just be me
reading and giving uncritical praise
it's a celebration of Papa's work for
sure and how it is Head and Shoulders
above others for so many reasons now
this particular piece can be found in a
few different places but notably it
begins the book conjectures and
refutations the first one the first book
of poppers recommended by David Deutsch
in the fabric of reality so though I
read it years ago after reading that
work by David on his recommendation
effectively it's taken until now for me
to finally come back to it again in full
and I think with new eyes here he is
solving actual problems in philosophy
and epistemology right before your eyes
but it's just a preface to a much more
substantial philosophy about how
knowledge is generated and what he says
for example in the rest of conjectures
and refutations about science so here
he's he's sort of just setting the scene
by going to the heart of matters about
the errors other philosophers make and
so he names them and explains their
positions giving lots of references lots
of examples lesson there for any other
philosophers and this is nice because
for a non-philosopher he's teaching you
about the history of ideas in philosophy
so you don't really actually need to
know in this particular part what human
Descartes and Spinoza wrote about and
what they were interested in because
he'll tell you and then he'll tell you
how they were wrong and what the right
stuff is now this will be part one of a
podcast series I presume it'll go over
at least two because I'm not going to
get through it all today and like I say
you can just contrast this style and the
substance of his writing with any of
those critiques I've done recently even
some of the more modern writing I
sometimes critique where people write
whole books even by experts on writing
and this is Papa not even writing in his
first language which is all the more
impressive so anyway let's get to this
remarkable piece by popper he begins
with a quote and the quote is by a
William Harvey quote true philosophers
who are burning with love for truth and
learning never see themselves as wise
men brim full of knowledge for most of
them would admit that even the very
greatest number of things of which we
know is only equal to the very smallest
fraction of things of which we are
ignorant nor are these philosophers so
addicted to any kind of tradition or
doctrine that they suffer themselves to
become their slaves and thus lose their
Liberty end quote William Harvey William
Harvey was an English physician a
scientist who lived towards the end of
the 1500s and well into the 1600s so
their papa straight away he is referring
to a guy who was engaged in science and
even back then this fellow a thorough
going fallibleist and someone who
understands the growth of knowledge
William Harvey realizes that we have a
lot of ignorance so you can see where
pop is getting his idea of infinite
ignorance from there people thought this
before that it doesn't matter how much
progress we make the amount we know is
only going to be equal to the tiniest
fraction of things of which were
ignorant Papa goes on with another quote
from Spinosa this time and he quotes
Spinosaurus saying quote it follows
therefore the truth manifests itself end
quote and Spinoza was a a great believer
in the faculty of reason the factory of
Reason giving us certain knowledge of a
kind and then we get a quote from David
Hume and he quotes humor saying quote it
is impossible for us to think of
anything which we have not antecedently
felt either by our external or internal
senses end quote so that we have Hume
saying well you can't know anything
unless it's come to you via your senses
at some point in time
well there we go so we've got these two
ideas there truth manifesting itself and
also whatever you know has to come to
you via your senses in the name of this
piece by papa is called on the sources
of knowledge and of ignorance and papa
goes on to saying quote the title of
this lecture is likely I fear to offend
some critical ears for although sources
of knowledge is in order and sources of
error would have been in order to the
phrase sources of ignorance is another
matter ignorance is something negative
it is the absence of knowledge but how
on Earth can the absence of anything
have sources this question was put to me
by a friend when I confided to him the
title I had chosen for this lecture I
was a little shaken by this for I had
been I confessed quite pleased with the
title hard pressed for a reply I found
myself improvising a rationalization and
explaining to my friend that the Curious
linguistic effect of the title was
actually intended I told him that I hope
to direct attention through the phrasing
of this time vital to a number of
historically important though unrecorded
philosophical doctrines and among them
especially to a conspiracy theory of
ignorance which interprets ignorance not
as a mere lack of knowledge but it's the
work of some mischievous power the
source of impure and evil influences
which pervert and poison our minds and
instill in us the habit of resistance to
knowledge end quote right and so what
popper is saying there is that there are
these other people he's going to talk
about at length in this piece that
insists that well we get knowledge
either from Nature by simply it comes to
us via our senses this is the empiricist
doctrine and so therefore you've got
this problem of how to explain ignorance
and how to explain error because that
can't come to you via your senses
something must have gone wrong but what
is it well there must be some great
conspiracy something is conspiring
against you perhaps other people the
evil other people are trying to deceive
you in some way and this might be one of
the only reasons that you end up making
errors because perhaps your reason this
pure reason to have your your mind's
capacity to understand the world Well it
can't be polluted itself it can't be
naturally error-prone can't allow that
and so therefore again the only way in
which you're going to make errors is if
there is some active conspiracy
something is deceiving you usually other
people these evil other people that are
out there and there's a note here that I
think it's worth reading Papa's written
a note at the bottom of the page about
Descartes Espinosa who he said went even
further and asserted that not only
ignorance but also error is something
negative a privation of knowledge and
even of the proper use of our freedom
and it gives some references to their
work there but you know I would say kind
of ignorance is just zero it's a
nothingness it's neither positive nor
negative a negative is something but
ignorance is not that it's the lack of
something it's just not knowing
something and the the knowledge is the
positive something but it too contains
ignorance it's not the a complete
picture so to speak there can never be a
complete picture anyway papa says after
having talked about the conspiracy
theory of ignorance okay keep that in
mind this conspiracy theory of ignorance
the idea is there is a conspiracy
keeping you ignorant because after all
as you will explain according to these
other people your senses and or your
reason together are going to give you
knowledge by which they mean some sort
of Justified true belief something like
that anyway that's going to give you
truth in some way so for whatever reason
they assume they've all got different
reasons some are religious and some are
not so religious they just think that
reason you can just well as I've been
saying recently one prominent 20th
century of loss has said you can observe
the facts of reality that kind of thing
so if you think that kind of thing
you've got a real problem for your
epistemology because so much of
epistemology should be about error and
ignorance and how that arises and how
you overcome it rather than you're just
given the truth in someone you're just
damn Reality by your senses and by your
reason and so he's saying the conspiracy
theory of ignorance is the way those
people explain why it is that so many
people are ignorant okay there's some
sort of evil going on in the sense that
an active conspiracy to keep the facts
away from typically by other people as
we'll see what papa says about this
quote I am not quite sure whether this
explanation allayed my friend's
misgivings but it did Silence him your
case is different since you were
silenced by the rules of the present
transactions I can only hope that I ever
laid your misgiving sufficiently for the
time being to allow me to begin my story
at the other end with the sources of
knowledge rather than with the sources
of ignorance however I shall presently
come back to the sources of ignorance
and also to the conspiracy theory of
those sources end quote so that's quite
nice he's saying there that um we the
reader and The Listener in your case are
silent for another reason because of the
rules of the prison transaction namely
he's he's written the book and he's not
there to answer our questions but we can
just articulate them anyway as we go
along so all of that was just the
introduction and what he's really about
to get into is part one so part one
quote the problem which I wish to
examine afresh in this lecture and which
I hope not to only examine but to solve
May perhaps be described as an aspect of
the old quarrel between the British and
the Continental schools of philosophy
the quarrel between the classical
empirical of bacon lock Berkeley Hume
and Mill and the classical rationalism
or intellectualism of Descartes benoitsa
and liebnitz in this quarrel the British
school insisted that the ultimate source
of all knowledge was observation while
the Continental School insisted that it
was the intellectual intuition of clear
and distinct ideas end quote so I can
see now myself as I look back because as
I say you know having when I first
started University I went and studied
philosophy I hadn't encountered popper
yet but I did encounter you know
Descartes was one of the first and he
would talk about this clear and distinct
ideas and no matter how much the
lecturers and tutors would try and
explain to me this concept of clear and
distinct idea and what Descartes was
saying about how you can't be wrong
about your clear and distinct idea I
didn't get it already then I was a
fallible host of a kind I mean I didn't
understand how you could just understand
stuff without error I think perhaps what
was in my mind was I was understand I
was also doing a little bit of computer
science at the time you know I've done
basic computer science in high school
and a whole bunch of stuff there was
about when you transmit messages it's
almost never reliable so you need these
error correction things when you
transmit a message from one place to
another and I thought well if even
digital systems are going to make errors
all the time and the fact that they they
were always making errors so you need
this error correction stuff although I
didn't understand computational
universality at that point I understood
era was kind of ubiquitous so we'd be
making it I'd learned that already from
computer science so I didn't understand
why this wasn't taken more seriously in
philosophy why should we be inerrant
what is this clear and distinct nonsense
clear Instinct ideas that the
Continental School had come up with okay
these Europeans and their idea of clear
and distinct ideas once you had a clear
and distinct idea that's it you could
have a clear and distinct idea that you
existed and therefore you could not
possibly be in error about that and I
bought that but I didn't buy how any of
the other things could be perfectly
clear and distinct you know I think
Descartes said that mathematics was a
clear and distinct idea so he couldn't
possibly be wrong about that I didn't
get that because I knew I'd made
mistakes in the mathematics exam so
explain that
okay let's keep going let's see what
popper has to say next quote most of
these issues are still very much alive
not only has empiricism still the ruling
Doctrine in England conquered the United
States but it is now widely accepted
even on the European continent as the
true theory of scientific knowledge
Cartesian intellectualism alas has been
only too often distorted into one or
another of the various forms of modern
irrationalism I shall try to show in
this lecture that the differences
between classical empiricism and
rationalism are much smaller than their
similarities and that both are mistaken
end quote classic popper classic popper
here you go they're always going to show
you the Third Way so you've got here's a
plausible sounding story here's another
plausible sounding story I'm going to
show that they're both implausible after
all
I think David Deutsche said has quipped
something like that before in the case
that both of these make Grand claims
about how knowledge is created that
doesn't prevent them from both being
completely mistaken and they are so
let's keep going papa says quote I hold
that they are mistaken although I am
myself both an empiricist and a
rationalist of sorts but I believe that
though observation and reason each have
an important role to play these roles
hardly resemble those which their
classical Defenders attributed to them
or especially I shall try to show that
neither observation nor reason can be
described as a source of knowledge in
the sense in which they have been
claimed to be sources of knowledge down
to the present day end quote in the end
of part one of this piece of this
lecture as he's calling it so empiricism
as we say you know pop hearing is a kind
of empiricist in the sense that
observation is absolutely crucial in The
Sciences what's the role of observations
twofold the observation can either be a
source of a problem of some sort you
know you make this observation you don't
understand what's going on
is your experiment flawed as your
observation flawed or is there something
about your present understanding of the
scientific theory that's Lord certainly
some serious law decided the theory of
observations or the theory of science
you know in other words you have a
misconception there's something going
wrong there's something you don't know
there's a problem with your theories
observations of theory Laden and so
therefore you've got a problem when the
observation doesn't fit with your theory
so that's one function of observations
and the other well you make an
observation when you've got competing
theories to rule out all of them except
for one and then you are back to an
unproblematic state so that is what
Popper's position is and what he is
going to explain in this paper and the
purpose of reason is to deduce stuff to
to actually figure out that well you
know when you make this observation
you've falsified some theories that's
the point of the observation so reason
can allow you to see which of your
theories has been refuted and which have
gone unrefuted but again as he says
that's not your source of knowledge your
source of knowledge comes from within
its conjectured from within okay let's
do section two now and papa Ryan's quote
our problem belongs to the theory of
knowledge or to epistemology reputed to
be the most abstract and remote and all
together irrelevant region of pure
philosophy Hume for example one of the
greatest thinkers in the field predicted
that because of the remoteness and
abstractness and practical irrelevance
to some of his results none of his
readers would believe in them for more
than an ally end quote so notice how
Papa begins there our problem belongs to
the theory of knowledge our problem it's
problem-centered all of this is
problem-centered he's asking a question
in this case he's asking the question of
well what is our source of knowledge and
what is our source of ignorance okay
because the other philosophers can't
account for this they're not accounting
for it at all he's recognized the
problem the problem being well you can't
just read from the book of nature
empiricism is false and your faculty of
reason is fallible so it can't be the
case that you get these clear and
distinct ideas so then how do you get
knowledge what is knowledge and where
does ignorance come from and all this
sort of stuff this is our problem the
problem within epistemology and he's
also having a dig there you know just
about every other philosopher who says
that well epistemology is thought to be
the most abstract or emotion altogether
irrelevant region of pure philosophy of
course he's going to show and his entire
life's work shows no this is really
really practical stuff and it's because
people don't have the right epistemology
they go wrong and everywhere else they
become authoritarian they become
dogmatic they even give amazing
they become prophets and they try and
predict stuff which is inherently
unknowable all of this kind of a thing
they they say that certain things are
science that aren't science and they
want to have a science of politics and
sociology and morality and all this sort
of stuff is it so it's very practical
people can waste their lives doing
certain stuff because they've got a
false epistemology Papa goes on to say
quote
attitude was different he thought that
the problem what can I know was one of
the three most important questions a man
could ask Bertrand Russell in spite of
being closer to Hume in philosophic
temperament seems to sight in this
matter with can't and I believe that
Russell is right when he attributes to
epistemology practical consequences for
science for ethics and even for politics
he points out for example that
epistemological relativism or the idea
that there is no such thing as objective
truth and epistemological pragmatism or
the idea that truth is the same as
usefulness closely linked with
authoritarian and totalitarian ideas end
quote and what does Papa end up quipping
at some point
he says the doctrine that the truth is
Manifest as the root of all tyranny he
eventually reaches that conclusion so he
agrees there with Russell the Russell
thinks that yes this whole idea that
somehow you can have the truth that is
the same as usefulness are linked with
authoritarianism and totalitarianism he
goes on Papa goes on to say quote
Russell's views are of course disputed
some recent philosophers have developed
a doctrine of the essential impotence
and practical irrelevance of all genuine
philosophy and thus one can assume of
epistemology philosophy they say cannot
by its very nature have any significant
consequences and so it can influence
neither science nor politics but I think
that ideas are dangerous and Powerful
things and that even philosophers have
sometimes produced ideas indeed I have
no doubt that this new doctrine of the
impotence of all philosophy is amply
refuted by the facts end quote
so who's he talking about he's so
talking about Wittgenstein there of
course and and wittgenstein's disciples
and followers and sadly a whole bunch of
people who are influenced by
Wittgenstein the very guy who I said at
the beginning wrote the book
philosophical investigations that is
regarded as the most important work of
the 20th century by University teachers
well there you go most important work
when you take a vote you take the straw
pile of the University professors is by
Wittgenstein and in fact by citation in
the social sciences and the humanities I
think is still Thomas Kern the structure
of scientific revolutions I think that
is still the most cited work which among
other things says popperians have a lot
of work to do the work is still all
ahead of us the next paragraph is one of
the ones that I sort of highlighted in
my introduction to this whole piece
where I was saying that I really do
think at times that Papa's substance is
second to none but also his style is
absolutely brilliant as well and he's
one of those sections of clarity that I
would say has a certain poignancy even
through to today what is saying Echoes
across the decades and speaks directly
to us about our circumstance and
although he's talking about epistemology
and science he he brings it into another
realm the very practical world of
politics and law and he writes quote the
situation is really very simple the
belief of a liberal the belief in the
possibility of a rule of law of equal
justice of fundamental rights and a free
Society can easily survive the
recognition that judges are not
omniscient and may make mistakes about
facts and that in practice absolute
Justice is hardly ever realized in any
particular legal case but this belief in
the possibility of a rule of law of
justice and of Freedom can hardly
survive the acceptance of an
epistemology which teaches that there
are no objective facts not merely in
this particular case but in any other
case and that the judge cannot make a
factual mistake because he can no more
be wrong about the facts that he can be
right end quote so there we go he's
saying there that you know this is the
importance of philosophy you need to
have an epistemology because if you've
got an epistemology that's relativist
then you're going to just presume
there's no right or wrong when it comes
to these absolutely crucial matters of
jurisprudence and politics the idea that
there are criminals out there doing
objectively wrong stuff now you don't
get that from Wittgenstein Wittgenstein
is like oh well you know there's no such
thing as a practical philosophy there's
no point of philosophy but hold on
epistemology is a part of philosophy and
if you're going around being a
relativist and teaching students
relativism then there is no objectively
right or wrong morality because the
epistemology says there is no such thing
as objectively right and wrong but this
is a problem for philosophy it's a
genuine philosophical problem
near Wittgenstein
it gets done as the one gets all the
props Dickinson is the one that is oh
the greatest philosopher of the 20th
century really really by what standard
we're up to section three now in section
three Papa right quote
the great movement of Liberation which
started in the Renaissance and led
through the many vicissitudes of the
reformation and the religious and
revolutionary Wars to the free Societies
in which the English-speaking peoples
are privileged to live this movement was
inspired throughout by an unparalleled
epistemological optimism by a most
optimistic view of Man's power to
discern truth and to acquire knowledge
at the heart of this new optimistic view
of the possibility of knowledge lies the
doctrine that truth is Manifest Truth
May perhaps be veiled but it may reveal
itself and if it does not reveal itself
it may be revealed by us removing the
veil may not be easy but once the Naked
Truth stand revealed before our eyes we
have the power to see it to distinguish
it from falsehood and to know that it is
truth the birth of modern science and
modern technology was inspired by this
optimistic epistemology whose main
spokesman were bacon and Descartes they
taught that there was no need for any
man to appeal to Authority in matters of
truth because each man carried the
sources of knowledge in himself either
in his power of Sen perception which you
may use for the careful observation of
nature or in his power of intellectual
intuition which he may use to
distinguish truth from falsehood by
refusing to accept any idea which is not
clearly and distinctly perceived by the
intellect end quote so there we go
there's Papa setting all the bricks up
to be knocked down he's telling you
there that on the one hand this is all
great stuff it did allow us to escape
from a certain kind of authoritarianism
but in its place it set up something
better but still not as good as what
popper himself is going to explain
namely that even though we've gotten rid
of these authorities these authorities
on Truth like the source of knowledge
being the holy book or the source of
knowledge being the priest or some other
authority who claims the authority of
possessing the truth well every person's
carrying around with them the faculties
to be able to find the truth now the
problem with DeShawn and Bacons of
course they thought that you could
actually get the truth the final once
and for all truth was going to be
manifest either by your senses or via
using your intellect your intuition your
reason and pop is of course going to say
those two things are absolutely crucial
but not quite in that way they are both
error-prone we have to interpret our way
to actual knowledge and the knowledge
itself is merely useful information that
contains some truth but it's not the
final word okay it's going to be an
explanation of the facts which can
always itself be subject to error and
subject to Improvement he goes on to
saying quote man cannot thus he can be
free this is the formula which explains
the link between epistemological
optimism and the ideas of liberalism
this link is paralleled by the opposite
link disbelief in the power of human
reason in Man's power to discern the
truth is almost invariably linked with
distrust of man thus epistemological
pessimism is linked historically with a
doctrine of human depravity and it tends
to lead to the demand for the
establishment of powerful traditions and
the entrenchment of a powerful Authority
which would save man from his folly and
his wickedness there is a striking
sketch of this theory of
authoritarianism and a picture of the
burden carried by those in Authority in
the main story of the grand Inquisitor
in dostoyevsky's the brothers karamazov
the contrast between epistemological
pessimism and optimism may be said to be
fundamentally the same as that between
epistemological traditionalism and
rationalism I am using the latter term
in its wider sense in which it is
opposed to irrationalism and in which it
covers not only Cartesian
intellectualism but empiricism also for
we can interpret traditionalism as the
belief that in the absence of an
objective and discernible truth we are
faced with the choice between accepting
the authority of tradition and Chaos
while rationalism has of course the way
it's claimed the right of reason and of
empirical science to criticize and to
reject any tradition and any Authority
as being based on sheer unrisen or
Prejudice or accident end quote so there
we have an earlier version of a kind of
divide between an epistemological
optimism and pessimism it's Genesis
there in the work of Papa here to some
extent but subtly different recall what
David Deutsch's principle of optimism is
all Evils are due to a lack of knowledge
so in a sense the source of evil is
ignorance if you like so evil can be
remedied with knowledge which as I've
said is a special case of problems are
soluble now what popper is saying about
optimism is that he's saying it is
possible to have knowledge to actually
create it he's saying that these people
bacon and day cut are going a little bit
further with their epistemological
optimism their version entails that we
can find the final truth some objective
final truth but of course we would say
today that well we can't State a final
truth we can't say what it is because
well true and false are properties of
propositions anyways and we can't speak
those only approximations to them but we
certainly admit our explanations contain
truth knowledge contains some truth also
contains some falsehood it is simply the
information that solves a problem and so
it gets copied now of course the classic
philosophies he mentions bacon and his
empiricism and Descartes and his
rationalism they think that this truth
can be had in some final way their
vision of knowledge was that it was a
Justified truth of some kind so it's
sort of somewhat astonishing to me that
this Vision in some form or other
persists to this day the influence of
the French and German intellectuals
cannot be under underestimated across
Europe across all of the Western World
America is a particular case in point
American intellectuals today if my own
experience has anything to go by are
plagued by a similar intellectual
inheritance they think that a final
truth is not only possible but desirable
that pure reason so to speak is an
exercise we perform on the evidence
which accumulates to a point where it
cannot be denied it's beyond all doubt
as a and is perfectly convincing you
know that kind of thing and so of course
this final truth can be possessed and
once you possess it well you've got the
truth and so you better want to defend
it and you're also in a superior and
perhaps lofty moral place as one of the
educated Elite so there is that bad turn
but you know at least we have the
admission that knowledge is possible
that solving problems is possible even
under this this form of pessimistic
epistemological optimism it stands in
stark contrast to the competing impulse
that knowledge is not possible at all
and this is the intellectual pessimism
that popper speaks of where it is
thought that people should be distrusted
in general because we cannot know and
hence we have to be saved from our fully
and wickedness as he said right there so
this requires powerful Traditions as a
manual can't argued on the one hand he
argued for freedom of thought Emmanuel
Khan but on the other hand they also
argued for people to be subjects who
obeyed their princes and presumably
strong princes as Roy Porter quipped in
his creation of the modern world Kant
might easily be called a timid State
functionary he he seems to think that
this was a person's highest calling
can't I mean to serve in the state to
serve the state in some capacity or
other though he's free to think he's
also expected to fall in line to be an
obedient servant of the prince so he was
authoritarian to the core when you
really read him Continental in his
Outlook he was no Mill he was no Godwin
he was no popper better than Plato
perhaps but barely it would seem to me
that epistemological optimists of
Descartes kind who thought knowledge was
possible and indeed absolutely true
knowledge was possible to come by
they're quite dangerous in politics
because their epistemological optimism
is the claim that the final truth is
recognizable by you when you have it you
know it must be the final truth when
you've got a hold of it and the idea
this is possible that's a very scary one
because that indeed is the truth is
Manifest crowd once you've got the final
truth your apt to defend it and to
defend it to the death that view of the
world is almost as bad I have to say it
is as bad as the view that well you're
just a pathetic human incapable of
thinking for yourself so let the state
do it for you in either case the
authorities are needed it's all terribly
anti-human of course what we know now
following David Deutsch is that optimism
is better considered as a philosophy of
ignorance we can cure our Ignorance by
correcting our errors and this means
infinite progress and a reduction in the
evils around the world that's infinitely
optimistic because you never run out of
ignorance you can just get rid of little
bits and pieces of it but you're always
just like everyone else infinitely
ignorant pessimism is the denial of all
that the claim progress must come to an
end or error correction must it's a
prophecy about the future content of our
explanations that they will be
self-contained in some way or that our
intellects are bounded pessimism has
this link to a known future and hence it
is prophetic to the core so it's no
accident that the converse holds as well
prophets tend to be pessimists they
imagine all the problems but they can't
imagine The Logical conjunction of all
the problems that's easy to imagine and
all the solutions which are hard to
imagine let me just read part four and
then we'll call it a day here this goes
up to part 18. I think I'll get through
with all of them it's going to take
about three reads I think part four from
Papa begins quote it is a disturbing
fact that even an abstract study like
pure epistemology is not as pure as one
might think and as Aristotle believed
but that its ideas May to a large extent
be motivated and unconsciously inspired
by political hopes and by utopian dreams
should this be a warning to the
epistemologist what can he do about it
as an epistemologist I have only one
interest to find the truth about the
problems of epistemology whether or not
this truth fits with my political ideas
but am I not liable to be influenced
unconsciously by my political hopes and
beliefs it so happens that I am not only
an empiricist and a rationalist of sorts
but also a liberal in the English sense
of the term but just because I am a
liberal I feel that few things are more
important for a liberal than to submit
the various theories of liberalism to a
searching Critical examination while I
was engaged in a Critical examination of
this kind I discovered the part played
by certain epistemological theories in
the development of liberal ideas and
especially by the various forms of
epistemological optimism and I found
that as an epistemologist I had to
reject these epistemological theories as
untenable this experience of mine may
illustrate the point that our dreams and
our hopes need not necessarily control
their results and that in searching for
the truth it may be our best plan to
start by criticizing our most cherished
beliefs this may seem to some a perverse
plan but it will not seem so to those
who want to find the truth and are not
afraid of it end quote so there popper
is concluding that this epistemological
optimism well it's a Fool's game it's a
Fool's errand there's no way of getting
to this truth that can be recognized as
the final truth but why as well what's
it got to do with these liberal ideas
what the liberal idea is that people are
free
free to try and go about their own lives
trying to understand the world and solve
their own problems and of course they're
going to make errors along the way but
they have to be free to be able to do
that free to have the discussions free
to learn about stuff by the method of
trial and error not being controlled not
having authorities rule over them this
is what Papa was concerned about through
of course his political philosophy as
well and so it has a direct connection
here as he says in trying to critique
that liberal view of the world he
realizes that well if people are going
to be free they're going to make
mistakes because they're never going to
get to the final answer and so it's
directly connected to the epistemology
there's no divorcing the epistemology
from the politics or the political
science if you like the political
philosophy it can't be the case that the
truth is Manifest if it were then you'd
have an authority who could possess that
final truth and could just command
everyone else to do what the ultimate
final truth tells them is the good the
right thing to do because anything thing
that stands against that cannot be the
good it can't be the truth it would be
an evil and the evil can't be allowed to
stand now we can agree that the evil
can't be allowed to stand but evil is a
kind of ignorance
and the only way of removing ignorance
is by creating more knowledge it's a
positive vision and everyone is
infinitely ignorant and always will be
who always will be infinite even though
there are these little bits and pieces
that each of us can learn and come to
know perhaps better than anyone else but
still still the little bits and pieces
that we know are just what makes us
different one from another but we are
all of us as papa says equal in our
infinite ignorance we'll be getting more
from Papa next time when I go on with
part five but for now bye-bye
[Music]
la la
foreign
[Music]